Pre tag (#132)
sanger-tol/treeval: docs/usage.md

## Introduction

The TreeVal pipeline has a few requirements before being able to run:

- The gene_alignment_data and synteny data much follow a particular directory structure

- HiC CRAM files much already be pre-indexed in the same location as the CRAM file, e.g., `samtools index {cram file}`. If this would be more helpful to the community as an automated process then please submit an issue.

- Finally, the yaml file which is described below in Full Samplesheet. This needs to contain all of the information related to the assembly for the pipeline to run.

### Prior to running TreeVal

:warning: Please ensure you read the following sections on Directory Strucutre (gene_alignment_data, synteny, scripts), HiC data prep and Pacbio data prep. Without these you may not be able to successfully run the TreeVal pipeline. If nothing is clear then leave an issue report.

#### Directory Structure

> Working example found here, [EXAMPLE](genealignmentsynteny.md), this will cover setting up synteny and gene_alignment_data directories as well as downloading some example data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Working example found [here](genealignmentsynteny.md), this will cover setting up synteny and gene_alignment_data directories as well as downloading some example data.
```

> These two sub-workflows, for now, need the use of the variables `classT`, `synteny_genome_path`, `data_dir` and `geneset`. These variables are found inside the yaml ( this is the file that will tell TreeVal what and where everything is ). Currently, we don't use `common_name`, e.g., `bee`, `wasp`, `moth`, e.t.c. However, we hope to make use of it in the future as our gene_alignment_data "database" grows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two sub-workflows, for now, need the use of the variables `classT`, `synteny_genome_path`, `data_dir` and `geneset`. These variables are found inside the yaml ( this is the file that will tell TreeVal what and where everything is ). Currently, we don't use `common_name`, e.g., `bee`, `wasp`, `moth`, etc. However, we hope to make use of it in the future as our gene_alignment_data "database" grows.
```

  │                             │   └─ { Chunked fasta files }
  │                             └─ pep
  │                                 └─ { Chunked fasta files }
  │
  ├─ gene_alignment_prep/
  │   ├─ scripts/             # We supply these in this repo
  │   ├─ raw_fasta/           # Storing your fasta downloaded from NCBI or Ensembl
  │   └─ treeval-datasets.tsv # Organism, common_name, clade, family, group, link_to_data, notes
  │
  ├─ synteny/
  │   └─ {classT}
  │
  ├─ treeval_yaml/ # Storage folder for you yaml files, it's useful to keep them
  │
  └─ treeval_stats/ # Storage for you treeval output stats file whether for upload to our repo

```

`classT` can be your own system of classification, as long as it is consistent. At Sanger we use the below, we advise you do too. Again, this value, that is entered into the yaml (the file we will use to tell TreeVal where everything is), is used to find gene_alignment_data as well as syntenic genomes.

![ClassT](../docs/images/SangerClassT.png)

##### Synteny

For synteny, below the `classT` variable you should store the full genomic fasta file of any high quality genome you want to be compared against.

> For bird we recommend the Golden Emu and the Finch, which can be downloaded from NCBI. Rename, these files to something more human readable, and drop them into the `synteny/bird/` folder. Any TreeVal run you now perform where the `classT` is bird will run a syntenic alignment against all genomes in that folder. It would be best to keep this to around three. Again, this is something we could expand on with the `common_name` field if people want in the future, submit a feature request.

Reviewer: Can you give the full common name of the finch (I guess it's zebrafinch, but there are _many_ finches). And for both, the scientific name as well ?

Author: That's fair.

Done.

##### Gene_alignment_data

> 

Reviewer: Almost the entire section here seems to be a repeat of `genealignmentsynteny.md`. Can't you just link to it like for PacBio after ?

Author: You're right. Removed.

Gallus_gallus.GRCg6a,cds,/gene_alignment_data/bird/Gallus_gallus/Gallus_gallus.GRCg6a/cds/Gallus_gallus18005cds.MOD.fa
Gallus_gallus.GRCg6a,cds,/gene_alignment_data/bird/Gallus_gallus/Gallus_gallus.GRCg6a/cds/Gallus_gallus6001cds.MOD.fa
```

This is all useful for the pipeline which generates job ids based on the org column, groups files by org and type columns and then pulls data from the data_file.

#### HiC data Preparation

Illumina HiC read files should be presented in an unmapped CRAM format, each must be accompanied by an index file (.crai) generated by samtools index. If your unmapped HiC reads are in FASTQ format, you should first convert them to CRAM format by using samtools import methods. Examples are below:

##### Conversion of FASTQ to CRAM

```bash
samtools import -@8 -r ID:{prefix} -r CN:{hic-kit} -r PU:{prefix} -r SM:{sample_name} {prefix}_R1.fastq.gz {prefix}_R2.fastq.gz -o {prefix}.cram
```

##### Indexing of CRAM

```bash
samtools index {prefix}.cram
```

#### PacBio Data Preparation

Find information on this here: [PacBio Data Prep](pacbio.md)

## Full samplesheet

> 

Reviewer: In this section, could you add links to the example yaml files that you use for the tests ? I think it'd be useful for people to actually see complete files.
